notes.md, before:

### Resources

A list of resources that have helped with reverse engineering the .d2s format.

* http://user.xmission.com/~trevin/DiabloIIv1.09_File_Format.shtm
* https://github.com/oaken-source/pyd2s/blob/master/docs/d2s_save_file_format_1.13d.txt
* https://github.com/WalterCouto/D2CE/blob/main/d2s_File_Format.md
* https://github.com/krisives/d2s-format
* https://github.com/nokka/d2s/blob/master/README.md


### Class

### Character Status

Loading a single player file with "Ladder" bit set to 1 in Character Status does nothing (duh).


### Character Menu Appearance

32 bytes starting at offset 136.

**Byte 141:  Weapon**

Some codes gleaned from testing:

* 04: Hand Axe
* 09: Wand
* 0D: Morning Star
* 0F: Flail
* 12: Sabre/Scimitar
* 13: Falchion
* 14: Crystal Sword
* 15: Broad Sword
* 1B: Short Spear/Knife

**Bytes 137..141 and 144..146: Armor**

As far as I can tell, bytes 137..141  the visuals of the body armor, and 144..145 decide the shoulderpads.

Good resource: http://paul.siramy.free.fr/_divers2/Extracting%20Diablo%20II%20Animations.pdf (Page 11)

Bytes 144..145 could be S1 and S2, and 137..141 obviously contain TR and probably RA and LA. More testing needed.

* 02 02 02 02 // 02 02 -- Scale Mail

* 03 03 03 03 // 03 03 -- Full Plate Mail

* 01 02 02 01 // 02 02 -- Studded Leather


### Mercenary

Starts at offset 177

**Mercenary ID**

Offset 179, 4 bytes

Appears to be 0 if you have never hired a merc, otherwise randomly generated.
Can be edited with seemingly no impact.

**Mercenary Name**

Appears unchanged from the list at http://user.xmission.com/~trevin/DiabloIIv1.09_Mercenaries.html

**Mercenary Variant**


| #     | Code      | Difficulty   | Act    | Variant       |
| ----- | ----      | ----------   | ---    | -------       |
| 0     | 00 00     | Normal       | A1     | Fire          |
| 1     | 01 00     | Normal       | A1     | Cold          |
| 2     | 02 00     | Nightmare    | A1     | Fire          |
| 3     | 03 00     | Nightmare    | A1     | Cold          |
| 4     | 04 00     | Hell         | A1     | Fire          |
| 5     | 05 00     | Hell         | A1     | Cold          |
| 6     | 06 00     | Normal       | A2     | Prayer        |
| 7     | 07 00     | Normal       | A2     | Defiance      |
| 8     | 08 00     | Normal       | A2     | Blessed Aim   |
| 9     | 09 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Thorns        |
| 10    | 0A 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Holy Freeze   |
| 11    | 0B 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Might         |
| 12    | 0C 00     | Hell         | A2     | Prayer        |
| 13    | 0D 00     | Hell         | A2     | Defiance      |
| 14    | 0E 00     | Hell         | A2     | Blessed Aim   |
| 15    | 0F 00     | Normal       | A3     | Fire          |    
| 16    | 10 00     | Normal       | A3     | Cold          |    
| 17    | 11 00     | Normal       | A3     | Lightning     |    
| 18    | 12 00     | Nightmare    | A3     | Fire          |    
| 19    | 13 00     | Nightmare    | A3     | Cold          |    
| 20    | 14 00     | Nightmare    | A3     | Lightning     |    
| 21    | 15 00     | Hell         | A3     | Fire          |    
| 22    | 16 00     | Hell         | A3     | Cold          |    
| 23    | 17 00     | Hell         | A3     | Lightning     |
| 24    | 18 00     | Normal       | A5     | Bash          |
| 25    | 19 00     | Normal       | A5     | Bash          |
| 26    | 1A 00     | Nightmare    | A5     | Bash          |
| 27    | 1B 00     | Nightmare    | A5     | Bash          |
| 28    | 1C 00     | Hell         | A5     | Bash          |
| 29    | 1D 00     | Hell         | A5     | Bash          |
| 30    | 1E 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Prayer        |
| 31    | 1F 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Defiance      |
| 32    | 20 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Blessed Aim   |
| 33    | 21 00     | Hell         | A2     | Thorns        |
| 34    | 22 00     | Hell         | A2     | Holy Freeze   |
| 35    | 23 00     | Hell         | A2     | Might         |
| 36    | 24 00     | Normal       | A5     | Frenzy        |
| 37    | 25 00     | Nightmare    | A5     | Frenzy        |
| 38    | 26 00     | Hell         | A5     | Frenzy        |

It appears that the codes have not been changed since: http://user.xmission.com/~trevin/DiabloIIv1.09_Mercenaries.html#code

Instead, the new codes (Nightmare A2 mercs with Prayer/Defiance/Blessed Aim, Hell A2 mercs with Thorns/Holy Freeze/ Might, and Frenzy Barbarians) have been appended to the table.

This also explains why Qual-Kehk usually has more Bash barbs than Frenzy: the two old codes per difficulty still mean bash, whereas there is only one of the new frenzy code per difficulty.


## Statistics

https://d2mods.info/forum/kb/viewarticle?a=448

Open as tab-separated csv.

Incompatible with 1.09 and before.

Saved is col 7
CSvSigned is col 8
CSvBits# is col 9


| Stat                  | ID        | Saved | Signed    | Bits      |
| --------------------- | --------- | ----- | --------- | --------- |
| Strength              | 0         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Energy                | 1         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Dexterity             | 2         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Vitality              | 3         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Stat Points Left      | 4         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Skill Points Left     | 5         | 1     | 0         | 8         |
| Hit Points (Current)  | 6         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Hit Points (Max)      | 7         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Mana (Current)        | 8         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Mana (Max)            | 9         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Stamina (Current)     | 10        | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Stamina (Max)         | 11        | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Level                 | 12        | 1     | 0         | 7         |
| Experience            | 13        | 1     | 0         | 32        |
| Gold (Inventory)      | 14        | 1     | 0         | 25        |
| Gold (Stash)          | 15        | 1     | 0         | 25        |


## Quests

Ex: Den of Evil
Quest not started: 0x00 0x00 =>                                 0000 0000   0000 0000
Quest started (Talked to Akara): 0x04 0x00 =>                   0000 0000   0000 0100
Cleared Den of Evil (Return to Akara for reward): 0x1C 0x00 =>  0000 0000   0001 1100
Talked to Akara (Completed quest): 0x01 0x30 =>                 0011 0000   0000 0001
Used skill point: 0x01 0x10 =>                                  0001 0000   0000 0001


## Waypoints

A new character will have three waypoints set to true by default: Rogue encampment in normal, nightmare and hell.
Getting to a new act automatically unlocks the town wp.

Commit message:

Add level validation and default(class) fn for character/attributes.

notes.md, after:

### Resources

A list of resources that have helped with reverse engineering the .d2s format.

* http://user.xmission.com/~trevin/DiabloIIv1.09_File_Format.shtm
* https://github.com/oaken-source/pyd2s/blob/master/docs/d2s_save_file_format_1.13d.txt
* https://github.com/WalterCouto/D2CE/blob/main/d2s_File_Format.md
* https://github.com/krisives/d2s-format
* https://github.com/nokka/d2s/blob/master/README.md


### Class

### Character Status

Loading a single player file with "Ladder" bit set to 1 in Character Status does nothing (duh).

The character level shown in the menu preview is the from the attributes section, but in-game it gets overridden by the level in character section.


### Character Menu Appearance

32 bytes starting at offset 136.

**Byte 141:  Weapon**

Some codes gleaned from testing:

* 04: Hand Axe
* 09: Wand
* 0D: Morning Star
* 0F: Flail
* 12: Sabre/Scimitar
* 13: Falchion
* 14: Crystal Sword
* 15: Broad Sword
* 1B: Short Spear/Knife

**Bytes 137..141 and 144..146: Armor**

As far as I can tell, bytes 137..141  the visuals of the body armor, and 144..145 decide the shoulderpads.

Good resource: http://paul.siramy.free.fr/_divers2/Extracting%20Diablo%20II%20Animations.pdf (Page 11)

Bytes 144..145 could be S1 and S2, and 137..141 obviously contain TR and probably RA and LA. More testing needed.

* 02 02 02 02 // 02 02 -- Scale Mail

* 03 03 03 03 // 03 03 -- Full Plate Mail

* 01 02 02 01 // 02 02 -- Studded Leather


### Mercenary

Starts at offset 177

**Mercenary ID**

Offset 179, 4 bytes

Appears to be 0 if you have never hired a merc, otherwise randomly generated.
Can be edited with seemingly no impact.

**Mercenary Name**

Appears unchanged from the list at http://user.xmission.com/~trevin/DiabloIIv1.09_Mercenaries.html

**Mercenary Variant**


| #     | Code      | Difficulty   | Act    | Variant       |
| ----- | ----      | ----------   | ---    | -------       |
| 0     | 00 00     | Normal       | A1     | Fire          |
| 1     | 01 00     | Normal       | A1     | Cold          |
| 2     | 02 00     | Nightmare    | A1     | Fire          |
| 3     | 03 00     | Nightmare    | A1     | Cold          |
| 4     | 04 00     | Hell         | A1     | Fire          |
| 5     | 05 00     | Hell         | A1     | Cold          |
| 6     | 06 00     | Normal       | A2     | Prayer        |
| 7     | 07 00     | Normal       | A2     | Defiance      |
| 8     | 08 00     | Normal       | A2     | Blessed Aim   |
| 9     | 09 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Thorns        |
| 10    | 0A 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Holy Freeze   |
| 11    | 0B 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Might         |
| 12    | 0C 00     | Hell         | A2     | Prayer        |
| 13    | 0D 00     | Hell         | A2     | Defiance      |
| 14    | 0E 00     | Hell         | A2     | Blessed Aim   |
| 15    | 0F 00     | Normal       | A3     | Fire          |    
| 16    | 10 00     | Normal       | A3     | Cold          |    
| 17    | 11 00     | Normal       | A3     | Lightning     |    
| 18    | 12 00     | Nightmare    | A3     | Fire          |    
| 19    | 13 00     | Nightmare    | A3     | Cold          |    
| 20    | 14 00     | Nightmare    | A3     | Lightning     |    
| 21    | 15 00     | Hell         | A3     | Fire          |    
| 22    | 16 00     | Hell         | A3     | Cold          |    
| 23    | 17 00     | Hell         | A3     | Lightning     |
| 24    | 18 00     | Normal       | A5     | Bash          |
| 25    | 19 00     | Normal       | A5     | Bash          |
| 26    | 1A 00     | Nightmare    | A5     | Bash          |
| 27    | 1B 00     | Nightmare    | A5     | Bash          |
| 28    | 1C 00     | Hell         | A5     | Bash          |
| 29    | 1D 00     | Hell         | A5     | Bash          |
| 30    | 1E 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Prayer        |
| 31    | 1F 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Defiance      |
| 32    | 20 00     | Nightmare    | A2     | Blessed Aim   |
| 33    | 21 00     | Hell         | A2     | Thorns        |
| 34    | 22 00     | Hell         | A2     | Holy Freeze   |
| 35    | 23 00     | Hell         | A2     | Might         |
| 36    | 24 00     | Normal       | A5     | Frenzy        |
| 37    | 25 00     | Nightmare    | A5     | Frenzy        |
| 38    | 26 00     | Hell         | A5     | Frenzy        |

It appears that the codes have not been changed since: http://user.xmission.com/~trevin/DiabloIIv1.09_Mercenaries.html#code

Instead, the new codes (Nightmare A2 mercs with Prayer/Defiance/Blessed Aim, Hell A2 mercs with Thorns/Holy Freeze/ Might, and Frenzy Barbarians) have been appended to the table.

This also explains why Qual-Kehk usually has more Bash barbs than Frenzy: the two old codes per difficulty still mean bash, whereas there is only one of the new frenzy code per difficulty.


## Statistics

https://d2mods.info/forum/kb/viewarticle?a=448

Open as tab-separated csv.

Incompatible with 1.09 and before.

Saved is col 7
CSvSigned is col 8
CSvBits# is col 9


| Stat                  | ID        | Saved | Signed    | Bits      |
| --------------------- | --------- | ----- | --------- | --------- |
| Strength              | 0         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Energy                | 1         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Dexterity             | 2         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Vitality              | 3         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Stat Points Left      | 4         | 1     | 0         | 10        |
| Skill Points Left     | 5         | 1     | 0         | 8         |
| Hit Points (Current)  | 6         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Hit Points (Max)      | 7         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Mana (Current)        | 8         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Mana (Max)            | 9         | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Stamina (Current)     | 10        | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Stamina (Max)         | 11        | 1     | 0         | 21        |
| Level                 | 12        | 1     | 0         | 7         |
| Experience            | 13        | 1     | 0         | 32        |
| Gold (Inventory)      | 14        | 1     | 0         | 25        |
| Gold (Stash)          | 15        | 1     | 0         | 25        |


## Quests

Ex: Den of Evil
Quest not started: 0x00 0x00 =>                                 0000 0000   0000 0000
Quest started (Talked to Akara): 0x04 0x00 =>                   0000 0000   0000 0100
Cleared Den of Evil (Return to Akara for reward): 0x1C 0x00 =>  0000 0000   0001 1100
Talked to Akara (Completed quest): 0x01 0x30 =>                 0011 0000   0000 0001
Used skill point: 0x01 0x10 =>                                  0001 0000   0000 0001


## Waypoints

A new character will have three waypoints set to true by default: Rogue encampment in normal, nightmare and hell.
Getting to a new act automatically unlocks the town wp.
